an area of low pressure. The cloud
is bringing the wet weather and it’s
mnning into
running into cold air. These are the
mnning into cold air. These are the
temperatures
running into cold air. These are the
temperatures out there at the
moment, —9 in the far north of
moment, -9 in the far north of
Scotland,
moment, —9 in the far north of
Scotland, that’s actually the lowest
temperature we’ve seen so far in the
UK this autumn and winter season and
with this wet weather running in
with this wet weather mnning in
from the
with this wet weather running in
from the East into that cold air we
are going to see some snow across
the high ground of northern England
and even for a time across quite low
levels in Scotland. Over some of the
mountains in Scotland we could be
looking at 10—20 centimetres of
looking at 10-20 centimetres of
snow.
looking at 10—20 centimetres of
snow. Some showers for Wales and the
snow. Some showers for Walas and the
south-west,
snow. Some showers for Wales and the
south—west, these could be wintry
south-west, these could be wintry
over high
south—west, these could be wintry
over high ground and this band of
rain across eastern England could
contain Sneyd —— sleet and wet snow.
contain Sneyd -- sleet and wet snow.
Tomorrow
contain Sneyd —— sleet and wet snow.
Tomorrow most of the snow becomes
confined to high ground with rain at
lower levels. Brighter towards the
south. These are the wind gusts,
they could be 50 miles an hour or
they could be 50 mils an hour or
more for
they could be 50 miles an hour or
more for western coasts, so with the
rain, sleet and snow and winds, it’s
going to feel cold, 4—7 C. Through
going to feel cold, 4-7 C. Through
the
going to feel cold, 4—7 C. Through
the weekend things will calm down.
It will slowly but surely turn
drier, but it will remain cold.
Still
ELECTRO CATWALK MUSIC
Welcome to The Wheel!
It’s already got us in a spin,
and there’s lots more to come.
The Tudors was in the 16005, right?
Pfft! And I’ve got 3 GCSE!
I’m not sensing the most
amount of confidence there.
Michael McIntyre’s The Wheel
continues...
HE HUMS
For me, it was
always about the music.
# Uprising, it’s an uprising
# There ain’t no work
and we have no shilling
# We can’t take no more
of this suffering...
# So we riot ina Brixton... #
# We can’t take no more
of this suffering
# So we riot ina Brixton... #
This isn’t a mere invention,
this is the substance of dreams.
# World, I want to leave you better
# I want my life to matter
# I am afraid I have no purpose here
# Have I the courage to change?
# Have I the courage to change
today? #
It has started.
Yo! Remember us?
Captivating drama...
Season’s greetings to you.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel,
Michelle Donelan, an MP since 2015,
following a career in marketing,
currently the Government’s
Minister for Universities.
Labour’s Shadow Minister
for Policing and the Fire Service,
previously Shadow Housing
Minister, Sarahjones.
Joining us down the line,
immunologist and Professor
of Experimental Medicine
at Imperial College,
and a member of Nervtag,
the Government’s advisory group
on respiratory viruses,
Peter Openshaw.
Liam Halligan, economist,
Telegraph columnist, and author
of books on housing and Brexit.
And Michelin—starred chef,
restauranteur and presenter of TV
programmes on weight loss,
and The Great British
Pub, Tom Kerridge.
APPLAUSE
Good evening.
Welcome to my guests
here in the studio and to Peter
who isjoining us down the line,
and to our audience who is coming
virtually tonight, as it
always is at the moment,
from Bath and around Bath.
Very good to see you.
And thank you, all of you,
for watching at home.
If you want to join
the conversation, you can
come in the usual way,
on social media, @bbcquestiontime.
Let’s kick off with their
first question tonight,
which is from Colleen Bower.
Hello there.
Scientists and regulators have done
an amazing job getting
the Pfizer vaccine developed,
approved and off
the starting blocks.
Will they and the public now be let
down at the final hurdle
by our logistics capabilities?
Sarah?
Well, it’s a good question,
and I think that’s the question
everyone is asking at the moment.
It’s fantastic news that
we’ve got the vaccine,
and it really is a moment to be
proud, to be proud of all
the scientists across the world that
are working on all these vaccines,
and to have that light
at the end of the tunnel.
When you’re putting up your
Christmas decorations,
you can think, "There will be an end
to this," because there
is a vaccine coming.
It’s brilliant.
But we know, and the scientists
have been really clear,
in the press conference
with the Prime Minister yesterday
and all through the day to day,
this is going to be
very challenging logistically.
Firstly, how is it
going to be delivered,
and to whom?
Of course there are tears of people
that are going to get it first.
—— Of course there are
tiers of people that
are going to get it first.
But I don’t know about you,
but my MP WhatsApp groups have been
buzzing all day with people saying,
"Well, we’ve heard there’s
going to be a hospital here doing it
and a hospital they are,
but what about our area?"
Everyone is worrying about that.
We worry about care
homes, of course we do,
because we know that,
you know, there are logistical
issues with this particular vaccine
in terms of the temperature it
needs to be.
Are we going to make sure we can get
to those care homes properly?
And then I think there is also
a challenge with public health
and making sure people know
that they can trust this vaccine
and that they should use it.
You know, we’re not measles—free
in this country any more.
We were.
We’re not any more, because people
haven’t trusted the vaccine,
so we need a really good
public health message.
But I think, you know,
this is a really big challenge.
The Government haven’t got it right
on things like test and trace.
They have to get it right now,
because there are people’s lives
on the line, and we can’t
get this wrong again.
Liam?
Well, vaccines of course mark
a major advance in human achievement
since the Enlightenment,
into the 19th century,
and Britain’s been at the forefront
of those achievements over
the years and decades.
But this isn’t the time
for vaccine nationalism,
and I agree we should congratulate
the scientists, the Pfizer
scientists in Belgium,
the Moderna scientists
in the States, you know,
British scientists working
in international teams
here in the UK with AstraZeneca.
But what about the
logistical capabilities?
That’s what Colleen
was asking about.
The logistical capabilities
are obviously forefront now,
now we’ve got a vaccine that’s been
approved, and I am reassured
that the British Army
are going to be involved.
Their absolute world expert clinic
at rolling out things,
—— They’re absolute world experts
complex capabilities.
This is probably going to be
the biggest logistical exercise
that our Armed Forces have
undertaken since the Falklands War,
which I’m old enough
to remember, just about.
So let’s hope so.
As a neutral, I’d like to see a lot
of cross—party cooperation, and I’m
encouraged with Sarah’s tone there.
I think everybody wants to see us
alljust getting on with this now.
We don’t want to see, you know,
competition between countries
on whose vaccine is best.
There will be some instances where
the Pfizer vaccine works better.
There will be other instances,
for instance, where you can’t
have a very, very cold
refrigeration, and maybe
across the developing world as well,
a cheaper vaccine
like the AstraZeneca Oxford
vaccine works better.
Let’s just keep our fingers crossed
and hope that we make
a good job of this.
Colleen, you ask the question.
What prompted you to ask this?
Is this because you’ve got concerns,
or what’s behind it?
Well, we haven’t really covered
ourselves in glory so far at any
logistical exercise.
I mean, with the PPE,
test and trace, any of the things
that have had to be done
to do with Covid.
So, yes, I have got concerns,
and I also think that maybe
the Government should be
managing expectations better.
They seem to come out and say,
"Everything’s going to be
done by springtime."
I think that’s highly
unlikely, given the record.
And I don’t know that a lot has been
gained by suggesting that.
It’ll be great if the military
is involved, and I think it would be
much better if the military
was involved in the command
and control, rather thanjust
the delivery side, and I hope that
that will maybe he the case.
50, Michelle, are we going to be let
down by logistics capabilities?
No, I think, to Colleen’s point,
I can totally understand why people
are concerned and nervous at this
stage, because we’ve got this
far and it’s good news.
But we’ve made it very clear
as a Government this is a massive
logistical challenge,
but one that our
massive NHS is up to.
This is the same NHS that’s got us
through this pandemic,
the fantastic people,
including in my own constituency,
that work tirelessly to support us.
We have a plan, we’re going to do
this, we’re going to do it together,
but this isn’t going to happen
overnight and we need to be very
realistic about that.
To be successful, we need to green
light other vaccinations.
This is just the first one.
It also depends on the manufacturer
of these vaccinations,
which to an extent is slightly out
of our control as well.
So this is going to
be a long process.
And hope and help is here, but we’ve
certainly got a long way to go.
Can I just ask you,
because the Government
and Jonathan Van—Tam have been
saying today the aim is to get
it to care homes first,
but there are difficulties with this
particular Pfizer vaccine because it
has to be stored at such
an incredibly cold temperature,
so it’s not going to get to care
homes first, but in Scotland
the Scottish Health Secretary says
care homes will have the vaccine
taken to them from the 14th
of December, so what is it that
they’re able to do that
we’re not able to do?
So, from my understanding,
it’s also that you can’t break up
the number of vaccines together...
No, no, why are they able...
So it is also about...
Why are they able to do it
and we’re not able to do it?
It’s also about breaking them up
and that needs the MHRA approval
to be able to do that so you’re
not wasting vaccines.
So if you were taking 600...
Yes, but that’s true
for the Scottish Government as well.
So is it that what they are saying
is not right, or can they do
something that we can’t do?
I think that that approval
is potentially forthcoming,
so that might...
I can’t speak to the exact comment.
It may be that they are banking
on that approval coming.
We’ve said throughout,
for a number of weeks now,
that our priority is care homes
and making sure we get that
vaccination in there
as quickly as possible.
We’ve got to do that and we will be
doing it as soon as we can.
Peter, in terms of the logistics
capabilities — it’s obviously
a fantastic breakthrough
to have a vaccine, let alone
a number of vaccines,
coming down the pipeline.
In terms of getting it out
to people, how confident
are you about that?
Yeah, so this is clearly
a tremendous triumph of science
that
we’ve managed to get this far.
I think we are up to the logistic
challenge, and that’s
because we have a superb system
in the NHS that can deliver vaccines
at scale, and we have tremendous
networks which are already present
throughout the country.
I don’t think we need to put
in a whole new command and control
system in order to do this
because we do have the people
already up for this
particular challenge.
I mean, I think the problem
about breaking up the batches
and getting them out into care homes
is a very important one.
We know that the best way to deliver
vaccines is at the point
where people are actually assembled
in workplaces, schools and so on.
We always know that that’s
the best way to do it.
So I think we must find ways
of getting round the logistical
problems which are because of having
only four stages that you’re
allowed, by the regulations,
to stage this vaccine as it comes
from the factory into
the delivery points.
But I think that is surmountable.
Itjust needs a little bit of work.
Tom?
From my point of view,
I mean it’s been a magical
couple of days, you know,
the news that’s coming through,
it feels that there is an end
to this nightmare that we’ve
all been living, feeling that...
However, you know, the short term
excitement about it,
long term there are those problems
of getting everybody vaccinated
to make sure that we can
get our lives back to normal
and running in that space.
I mean, yes, we have a poor
track record of how
we’ve dealt with coronavirus,
I have to be honest.
As you sit there and somebody
from the outside, within industry,
and you look at the way that...
I mean, how the whole thing
has been dealt with.
You look at the track
and trace system.
It is something that we
have struggled with.
I mean, there have been
bold claims about it
and we are still struggling
with it now.
So I can understand people’s worry,
Colleen’s point of view,
"Are we going to fall into the same
trap where it comes to rolling out
the logistics of this?"
However, I mean, logistics,
it isn’t falling into that tech
problem where we’re trying to get
everybody to download apps
and try to make the app work.
It is much more of a case
of being connected to human beings,
manoeuvring, getting close
to people, and resolving it.
So, yes, I think if there
are the army brought in,
if there are people all over this
who have an understanding
of how logistics works,
it isn’t the same as the track
and trace system, so it does give us
hope that perhaps there is something
that’s coming through the other side
that we will eventually get
something right during this.
There’s lots of hands up.
Let me go around our audience.
Beth?
It’s obviously been a really
difficult year for everyone,
and I think news of this vaccine
is a huge encouragement
that the end is in sight,
But also it’s a very specific
vaccine in that it has to be stored
at —70 degrees C.
It can’tjust be kept in the fridge
like most normal ones can.
And, looking at who is going to be
receiving it first, care homes,
other facilities that perhaps aren’t
geared to catering for this type
of refrigeration, that could be
an additional logistical challenge.
But I think, noticing
the fact that we’ve managed
to produce this vaccine,
scientists and researchers
produced vaccine within a matter
of months,
it’s actually a the remarkable feat,
and I think the logistical side
of it will be relatively easy
compared to developing
the vaccine in the first place.
Patrick?
This side of Christmas,
I think the logistics
of delivery might well go
very well, hopefully.
But, given that the majority
of the vaccines have
to come from overseas,
there’s an unfortunate bit
of timing that’s going to occur
on December the 31st,
and that’s Brexit of course,
and I wonder whether we can expect
some delay on deliveries
after that date.
Lawrence?
Yes.
No doubt, it’s absolutely
brilliant news, but this
is an international problem,
and Bath is very much a tourism
city, so I’d like to know
what the follow—up to this is.
As we start becoming
vaccinated and the rest
of the world becomes vaccinated,
is there some sort of passport
system that will be introduced,
so that we can start travelling
abroad and tourists can start
travelling back into the UK that
have been vaccinated?
Michelle, let me ask you about that,
and first of all the question
from Patrick about is Brexit
going to stop, or slow down,
the import of the vaccine
into this country.
And then there is talk
about an immunity passport,
which was hinted at by
the Vaccines Minister,
Nadhim Zahawi, and then seemed to be
dismissed by Michael Gove.
So what we’ve said as a government
on this, we’ve not got plans
to introduce a passport or anything
like that, of that nature.
Of course businesses may look
to do that in the future,
but the key thing here needs to be
promoting the vaccine and getting
the rest of those vaccines green [it
so that we can start the roll—out
properly and effectively.
And are you concerned that
after December the 31st we might
have an issue getting vaccines
across as speedily as we might like?
So the negotiations are going on,
we know that, and they are going up
to the wire, and we all appreciate
that, but they are still going on,
and we’ve done endless preparations?
Every eventuality.
705 million into our borders, etc.
So we are prepared, should
that happen, either way.
Peter, have you got any
concerns about that,
in terms of vaccines,
medicines, coming across,
but vaccines in particular,
after December the 31st?
Is that something you’ve
discussed as scientists?
Yeah, I desperately hope not.
I mean, it would be
an absolute disaster if Brexit
were to cause problems
with transport of medicines.
Other medicines as well as vaccines.
I think it highlights an issue that
we’ve all been concerned
about in the medical arena,
that a lot of our medicines do
actually come from overseas,
and we need to make absolutely sure
that the supply is going to be
uninterrupted, and we have often
quite short supply chains and not
very large stocks of a lot
of medications, and I think this
really illustrates that problem.
But I hope it will be overcome.
It’s really a political problem
rather than a scientific one.
Well, since we’ve mentioned
the Brexit word and there was a time
when this programme,
believe you me, when we mentioned
nothing but, let’s take a question
from Catherine Hodges...
Has our departure from
the European Union actually helped
in speeding up the process
to approve the vaccine?
DOG BARKS.
Look, even Catherine’s
dog isjoining in the
question, as we can hear!
Michelle, just clarify
where we stand with this,
because we’ve had a number of things
about this from various people
in the Government today.
Yeah, look, this is a global
pandemic, it’s been a global
response, and, including on this...
But has leaving the European Union
sped it up, as Matthew
Hancock has suggested 7
So, basically, we have our own
independent regulator.
They have approved this.
The European Union together have
decided to collectively
back their regulator.
It wasn’t against European rules
for them to have deviated,
each independent state.
They chose not to do that.
But the important
thing here is that...
No, but the important
thing is the question.
The question is has leaving
the European Union helped
in speeding up the process
to approve the vaccine?
The Health Secretary said,
"We all do the same safety checks" —
he’s talking about the Europeans.
"But we’ve been able to speed up how
they’re done because of Brexit."
Is that right?
So, as I’ve said, the Europeans have
collectively utilised one regulator,
and we have our own regulator,
and they’ve adopted
different processes here.
So what they’ve done,
we have given them rolling
results throughout...
Yes, but have we been able
to do it more quickly?
Yes, we’ve been able to do it more
quickly because they’ve
accessed rolling results,
they’ve tested it sequentially,
and that has speeded up the process,
but it hasn’t cut corners around
the safety, and that is why we can
be confident that this vaccine
will work, it will be effective,
and it won’t have those
side—effects you might
worry about, thinking,
"Golly, this has been
done so quickly."
Are you concerned that
because Matthew Hancock said that,
and we’ve also had Gavin Williamson,
the Education Secretary of course,
saying, "We’ve got the very best
people in this country,
we’ve obviously got the best medical
regulators, better than the French,
better than the Belgians,
we’re a much better country
than every single one of them,
including the US", you’ve now got
the most senior medical
officer in the States,
Anthony Fauci, responding,
saying, "The UK took the data
from Pfizer and instead
of scrutinising it carefully,
they said, OK, let’s approve it,
and that’s it", and you also had
the EU kicking back as well.
So, as Peter will tell you,
this is approved by an independent
regulator that is world renowned,
so we should all have faith
in this vaccination.
I don’t think we should be afraid
of talking up our country
and the people that work in it,
and absolutely amazing
scientists that have worked
on the process here,
the regulation, getting
it through on time.
It is a fantastic achievement,
but it is also a worldwide
achievement, and we are relying
on a catalogue of other
vaccinations that have been
produced across the globe.
Peter?
Yeah, I think the MHRA is one
of the most respected
bodies internationally.
They are extraordinarily careful
in the way in which they scrutinise
medicines to ensure they are not
only effective but also safe.
And I have no concerns
at all about the way
in which they scrutinised the data
on the Pfizer—BioNTech vaccine.
I think it is very, very
important that medicines
are properly regulated and,
you know, we do have a very
proud record of it.
I don’t think it’s really
been affected by Brexit,
because this is an emergency
regulation which has gone
through all the due processes,
and I’d be very happy indeed to be
given this vaccine tomorrow
if it was offered to me.
So I’m just wondering what you make
of the responses that we had today
from the European Union,
from Anthony Fauci,
for example, who clearly...
Well, it suggests they feel a bit
stung by what’s been said over here.
I think there is
unfortunate international
competition being setup.
You know, this is really
us against the virus,
it’s not us against the Americans,
us against the Europeans.
We all ought to be pulling together
and trying to do everything we can
to defeat this virus.
And just speaking with one voice.
And I think it’s very unfortunate
indeed if we are actually
trying to divide opinions
on this particular matter.
It’s quite clear that it’s been
very, very carefully scrutinised,
and I have no concerns about it.
Yeah, I mean, some of the comments,
it’s almost like, you know
when you’re a parent
and you think your kids are the best
kids and the cutest kids,
but you don’t go and tell
all the other parents that
you’ve got the best kids
and the cutest kids.
Itjust seems crass to say,
"Oh, we’re the best
country in the world —
aren’t we great?
oh, it’s because of Brexit,
which was my policy."
That’s not the point, at all,
of what we’re doing here, and,
you know, as it happens —
I did a lot about global,
a lot of work about global branding,
what the world thinks of us.
As it happens, the world has
a good view of us in terms
of our ability to make things,
to get things done.
If something is made
in Great Britain, people
will trust it round the world.
We’re very high up in terms
of respect for what
we do and who we are.
We don’t need to use crass
comments and shout about it.
People know that we are good
at science and we’re
good at what we do.
But so is the rest of the world,
and this is a time for all of us
to celebrate what happened
and to come together and not
to try and, you know,
make some cheap points,
I think.
Alex?
I really do think we need
to get away from this idea
of vaccine nationalism.
I completely agree.
We all really need to
be in this together.
We should all be working together
to get the vaccine out
as quickly as we can,
ensuring that it’s safe
and that it’s effective,
and I think that kind of...
The point we made earlier,
you know, that’s why I think
Gavin Williamson’s comments
were very, very unhelpful.
You know, it wasn’t diplomatic.
It’s not particularly helpful
considering the Brexit negotiations,
so I think, you know,
the world knows that British
scientists are amongst the best,
but I really don’t think those
comments were helpful and I think
we should all be clubbing together
and doing everything possible
as an international community.
Tom?
It felt really quite toe—curlingly
cringing this morning,
the words that were coming out.
It turned into some kind of
political points scoring space race.
And, I mean, how the science has
worked together to make this
happen has been amazing.
Lots of vaccines being announced
that pretty much the same time.
Clearly, the scientists have been
working together to create something
that solves a world problem,
and it’s something that we should
all be so proud of, and this morning
those comments that were coming out,
I said it and like someone
was saying, that bit where you talk
about your child thinking he’s
the best or whatever,
and Ifound it quite embarrassing
this morning, those comments.
Yeah, a little toe curling.
Patrick, you’ve got your hand up?
Yeah, thank you.
I’ve only ever been
involved from the periphery
with the regulatory process
of medicine, but as I understand it
the MHRA have run some of the phases
and some of the steps in parallel
with each other rather
than sequentially, with some
overlap between them,
and that’s what short
and everything.
But I think the MHRA
is an institution with a significant
international reputation and it
will stand by having done that
and it willjustify not
having cut any corners,
so I feel quite confident
in what they’ve done.
Matthew T — I’ll call you Matthew T
because we’ve got two
Matthews in her audience.
Thank you.
I was wondering, instead
of obviously saying crass comments,
how would the panel suggest
that we should collaborate
with other nations better
during this whole vaccine roll—out?
Gosh, now that is a big question.
Liam, feel free to tackle that,
but let’s also look at the original
question, which is has our departure
from the European Union actually
helped in speeding up the process
to approve the vaccine?
Well, the response to Catherine’s
original question, I mean,
people can take from this
what they will, and it’s kind
of depressing that we are still
fighting the referendum ofJune 2016
even at this very late stage.
As a point of fact, that
you could have invoked emergency
powers to speed up the regulatory
process, but it chose not to,
and if we were still part
of the European Union we would be
part of that collective decision.
We decided to not be part of that,
and that’s why, as a point of fact,
we were able to approve this
vaccine slightly quicker.
But individual countries can
take individual powers
to do it individually,
even within the EU.
They can, in principle, but they’ve
agreed between them to not do that,
and we would have been part
of that decision.
That’s just factually accurate.
That’s what it is.
What I didn’t like, I mean,
the European medical
agency again yesterday,
before Gavin Williamson’s comments —
which I agree were completely crass,
and if it was a joke it went badly
wrong — but the European medical
agency yesterday was casting
aspersions on our regulatory testing
regime, which the WHO has described
as world class and is widely
seen as world class.
That’s not a nationalistic
thing to say, again,
it’s just a point of fact.
And I think once you get into this
folly of different parts
of the world, politicians
chest—beating, saying "Our
regulations are better
than your regulations",
look, as people with public
platforms scientists, journalists,
we’ll have a big responsibility
here.
Quite a lot of our population,
and maybe we will come onto this,
Fiona, is concerned
about taking this vaccine.
A much smaller proportion,
I’d say, well, it’s true,
here in the UK than in many other
countries in Europe
and across the world.
We don’t want to get into some
Dutch auction of whose
regulator is better.
The fact is we did do the phase one,
two and three tests here.
The Chinese and Russians have got
vaccines, which they are rolling out
before they completed those
phase three tests.
And it was very good to hear
from Peter some of the reasons why,
and indeed from our audience,
from Matthew, why it is that we’ve
managed to truncate this by doing
different things in parallel.
Vaccines take years,
but usually you’re trying
to generate funding all the time,
and we obviously don’t have that.
I’d like to see us getting
beyond this vaccine nationalism,
which I think Gavin Williamson’s
comments played into,
and I think we’ve all had enough
of this virus around the world.
We want to see our leaders getting
on and supporting each other,
calling out regulatory slips
where we can see them happening,
but supporting each other
when we can see the responsible
regulatory bodies are
doing theirjob, whoever
gets there a few weeks first.
0K.
I’m going to move on in a minute,
but before I do I want to mention
that next week we are looking
for people to join our virtual
audience from Chelmsford.
That is our last programme before
Christmas, actually.
So next week it’s from Chelmsford,
and also Ijust wanted to let
you know that we are introducing
a new kind of audience
after Christmas.
50 early next year,
that is until we can get
back on the road again
and have an audience
here in the studio like we used to,
so we are looking for 50 people
from across the whole of the UK
to be part of a regular audience,
and we will then take our audience
from that pre—selected
group of 50 people.
So if you want to be part of that,
and obviously you need to have some
opinions and be free most Thursday
nights, but if you want to be part
of that go to the Question Time
website and you can see how
to apply.
We love to hear from you.
Do be part of that.
It will be called the QT 50, so look
for that on the website, the QT 50.
Right, and of course in the meantime
if you live around Chelmsford
apply for next week.
So let’s take our next programme
from Matthew Batchelor.
Matthew?
Good evening.
Why can everyone pile into town
shopping centres by the thousands,
but less than 100 people can’t sit
at tables in pubs?
Matthew, are you asking this
from personal experience?
Yes.
You can control people in a pub
because they have to sit at a table
and they stay there,
whereas in shopping centres
they pretty much run
round everywhere and do
what they want.
And this is because you
work in a pub, do you?
Yes.
And are you working at the moment?
No, I’m on furlough at the moment,
until the 16th of December,
depending on if we stay in Tier 3
or go to Tier 2.
So I’m assuming, because Bath
is in Tier 2, but you must
just be outside, then,
in 3 Tier 3 area?
Just outside.
Literally 200 yards, my pub is,
from being in Tier 2.
Right.
Well, Tom, obviously I’m
going to come to you first.
Yeah.
I mean, hospitality,
like Matthew was saying
there has been hugely exposed
to all of this pandemic.
It’s been the industry that’s
been at the front line,
as well as travel and tourism,
aviation, all of those
sort of industries have
all been hit massively,
but from my point of view
hospitality is under a huge amount
of pressure right now.
We are able to open 200 yards away
from Matthew, but you’re not now.
All these contradictory questions.
And the problem that you come
across is that so many pubs,
so many restaurants,
hotels, have spent so much money
over a period of time
being able to reopen,
reinvest, try to make
themselves Covid secure,
trying to make sure health
and safety is being adhered to,
risk assessments done,
PPE, social distancing.
So we get through that first
lockdown period, where,
to be fair to the Government,
the furlough scheme that Matthew’s
on, has been incredibly helpful
from a starting point of view,
but moving forward to open
within the industry it does
need much more help.
There are pubs that are closed
now losing thousands
upon thousands of pounds.
What would you like to see happen?
Moving forward, I mean, the future,
first of all we need plenty of
investment.
The Government has proposed
a grant of, what is it,
£1,000, a one—off payment to pubs
that can’t serve food...
Yeah, it shouts it out
as A0 million, and
then by the time you break that
down to wet—led pubs.
Wet—led pubs have been
one of the worst hit in
this.
And just to be clear,
because not everyone’s
as familiar with the
terminology as you,
so that’s a pub that can’t...
That doesn’t serve substantial
meals — itjust serves
mostly drinks and snacks.
Mostly drinks.
The community pubs, the places
where people go and meet up,
the people that hang
out, the people...
That are the centres
of people’s hearts and souls,
these are the pubs
that are massively
being hit, that don’t
serve a Scotch egg.
These are the places that,
you know, are wet—led pubs.
With a pickle on the side.
So the grant that I mean,
I interrupted you to just explain
what the word meant,
but we were talking
about the grant from
the
Government.
Yeah, so that A0 million,
by the time that’s been
spread out to wet led pubs, 0K,
these are the places that have not
had that VAT cut.
So even if they have
not been able to
operate, their turnover
figures, they haven’t
got that 5096 where
the
Government have come in and it’s
been very helpful for food and
hotels and accommodation,
but for these pubs they
haven’t had that break.
Social distancing.
Those pubs make very,
very small margins.
I mean, there are small margins
in hospitality anyway.
For those pubs, it is even
smaller on alcohol.
There is a huge amount
of taxation on it.
The actual spend...
Well, look, you’ve got
a representative of the Government
here.
What would you like
the Government to do?
I mean, the VAT cut,
it should he being pushed onto
wet—led pubs, onto alcohol.
The idea that the restrictions
that you make,
that people are not allowed to go
into pubs unless they’re having
something to eat, the question that
Matthew’s asking about
shopping centres or pubs, I mean,
there is no real difference.
We are all grown adults.
Surely you can go out
and have a drink socially rather
than shopping.
The idea that alcohol is driven
to people’s behaviour,
the way that it changes —
there are plenty of people thatjust
enjoy socially mixing,
hanging out, under
Covid—safe environments,
making sure that they can be there.
That VAT cut should
be put onto pubs.
Michelle, do you want
to tackle this?
Yeah, well, first of all, I’lljust
say I totally agree with you.
Pubs have gone above and beyond to
try to get Covid—secure,
and the impact on the hospitality
sector has been awful.
I’ve seen that in my own
constituency, with countless people
having to be furloughed,
just like members of this audience.
And the £1000, I don’t
think we canjust
target and focus on that,
because that’s part
of the bigger context.
A pub that has to
close at the moment
also gets £3000.
They got up to £25,000
in the first tranche.
There is the furlough
scheme, there’s also
the VAT, down to 5%...
Not on wet—led pubs.
No, no, yes, but what I’m saying
is this is part of a
broader package.
It won’t be applicable
to all of them, but the
majority is to most.
So we can’tjust focus on that 1000.
I think the Prime Minister
was announcing that as an additional
support, an additional help.
And I hear what you’re
saying about "Why pubs?
"Why have pubs been
unfairly hit or targeted?"
And no politician wants
to make these choices.
I didn’t enter politics
to close down pubs.
But you could make the choice.
You can make the choice to give
more support to pubs.
But I think that the point
that was also being made was,
"Why are we actually making these
decisions in the first place?", and
it’s fundamentally
for public health and safety,
directed by the science...
Government Public Health England,
transmission rates in
hospitality was at 3%.
That’s right.
Between 3% and 5%
within hospitality.
And 10% of the workforce,
hospitality...
Hospitality also employs
over 3 million people.
It’s sat there, and we saw
the Eat Out To Help Out scheme,
places where the infection rate
did not rise then.
The infection rate rises came
when students were moving up
and down the country...
I don’t think we should
blame students.
I’m not blaming students,
I’m blaming movement of people.
The students aren’t to blame.
If the movement of people.
0K.
We’ve got Peter.
Peter, do you want to pitch in here,
since you’re clearly the man
who is looking at this evidence,
as a scientist?
So I think it’s very clear
that there are things that transmit
the virus really well,
and that’s often in venues
where there is poor ventilation,
loud music, and people have to shout
to overcome the noise,
and then you are emitting a lot
of snifﬂe particles which contain
a lot of the virus, so that’s
a perfect transmission environment.
If you have a quiet environment
with well—ventilated areas
and where you can actually have
social separation, and there
are lots of very well—managed places
where you can go and have a meal
and so on and drink a pint
at the same time,
where the transmission risk
is very, very low.
But I think it has been
clear that loud music
and shouting in an enclosed
environment is perfect
for transmission of the virus.
So if it was a pub that
wasn’t playing music,
would you be happy for peopla
to go there?
I personally would feel
quite comfortable to go
into a pub where it was
quiet, well ventilated,
and where you could actually
keep your distance from people.
This is an industry
that is on its knees,
and these aren’tjust...
These are places that are closing.
It’s an industry that was struggling
before Covid came along,
and now we are at a point where many
loans have been taken out to be
able to get to reopen,
and then being put into tiered
systems where the evidence
for their closure has
been pretty selective.
Tom. . .
I’m sorry to interrupt you.
It’s not because we don’t
want to hear what you’ve got to say,
but I need to let everyone else
in as well.
Obviously you feel so passionately,
as of course you do —
this is the absolute heart and soul
of what you do.
Let’s hear a bit more
from our audience.
Yeah, Ijust wanted to say,
this is an argument that’s going
to rumble on for months to come.
Don’t we all think it’s
time we have a Minister
in Parliament for Hospitality?
Tom is nodding at that.
Andy?
He wants the job!
LAUGHTER
It could be
a new gig for you!
Andy?
I think the hospitality industry has
been given some guidelines,
and I think in some way it can be
self regulated because,
from my point of view,
if I was going to go to a restaurant
and I thought they were sticking
to the guidelines well,
I’d go to that restaurant,
or I’d go to that pub.
And you can see some that maybe
aren’t doing it so well,
maybe you wouldn’t visit those.
So I think as long as there
are guidelines, really,
these places need to be open.
I’m sure they need to be
open because, you know,
there are a lot ofjobs at stake
in this sector, so, you know,
a little bit of self regulating,
I think, and then people can
make their own choice.
"I’m not going to go in that
pub because it looks
too busy and too loud."
Anya?
I completely agree
with what Andy’s saying.
I think it’s really important
we do keep a lot of these
hospitality places open,
because especially for students
who are using things like this to
get through college and university.
It’s really hard when you’re
not making that money,
and it has had a knock—on effect.
Not only are the pubs not doing
well, but it’s also had a knock—on
effect for the employees
who work there.
And I think it’s a bit...
It’s something that you have
to work on, so as long
as they are doing their bit
and keeping it well ventilated
and following guidelines,
it’s a bit like school.
Schools are open, they are all
socialising in big numbers,
and I think if we can do that
at school it’s not...
Like, it’s had a big
effect on hospitality
by shutting down those.
Liam?
As I said, the hospitality
sector employs, you know,
10% of the workforce,
and it doesn’t give me any pleasure
to say it but we are facing
a tsunami of unemployment here,
and with the best will in the world
even though the vaccine
is clearly on the way,
and Amen to that, but we could have
another three, four, five,
six months of lockdown,
and I personally think we need to be
much smarter about how we lockdown.
Locking us down by region is too
much of a blunt instrument.
Look at the case of Kent,
where you’ve got high infections
on the Medway towns but then
in rural Kent you have some
of the lowest infection
rates in the country.
The Covid Recovery Group
in the Commons earlier this week,
they pushed the Prime Minister
to say he wants to be more granular,
breaking down regions
into particular areas,
so that country pub where our
resident scientist says
there really is no danger,
as long as it’s well
ventilated, you know,
that’s a family with their house,
their mortgage, their life savings.
And Tom’s nodding from the waist.
So we have to help businesses to get
through what could be
another six months of this,
and, yes, we can offer more help,
and we want to see that,
but we’re borrowing £400 billion
this year, in a single year.
I mean, this is completely
outlandish amounts of money.
There has to be a limit to just
throwing money at a situation.
It’s now costing us
£1 billion a day.
So if it’s not question of money,
what are you suggesting it is?
Is it a question of
opening up these areas?
I think we need to lockdown
in a much more granularfashion,
more geographically specific.
And, also, it’s often pooh—poohed,
that I think there is a case for age
stratification when it comes
to lockdown, letting
the younger generation get out
there and do their thing,
shielding the elderly,
if they want to be shielded.
People often say that’s
impossible because there
are multi—generational households.
You know, Fiona, 92%
of all British workers,
people of working age,
do not live with anyone over 65,
where the vast majority
of Covid fatalities and very
serious cases occur.
We can use unused hotels if we need
to, where you do have
multi—generationalfamilies,
so workers aren’t coming home,
and, in the fabled unfortunate
phrase, killing their granny.
That would be a lot cheaper
than keeping the economy shuttered.
It’s notjust the money we’re
spending every day on lockdown
in terms of furlough
and business support.
It’s the taxes we’re not raising.
And, you know, unless we’re
going to have a major economic
overhang going on for years
and years and years,
and the difficulty of funding
infrastructure, public services,
all the things we need
going forward, we have
to get our economy moving again.
Peter, since we’ve got you here,
there’s an argument that a number
of people have raised in the press
and occasionally in
this programme too.
This idea of stratification,
as you are calling it,
but basically shielding certain
sections of the population, letting
the others have much more freedom.
Are you convinced by that?
ﬂ
I think we know that if we try that
then it is going eventually to work
its way up to the most vulnerable.
Admittedly, there is very good
evidence that the most vulnerable
are managed to screen themselves off
still, and there is a declining rate
of disease transmission still in
those most vulnerable people, but it
is inevitable and we have seen this
in many locations, that when you try
to allow the rate to go up a little
bit in order to open businesses that
inevitably it does climb through
into the vulnerable population, so
it is a really difficult problem,
it is a really difficult problam,
and I so
it is a really difficult problem,
and I so hope we can get the
and I so hope we ran get the
vaccines
and I so hope we can get the
vaccines into those vulnerable
populations so that that effect
won’t occur. Sarah? I think I
won’t occur. Sarah? Ithinkl
completely
won’t occur. Sarah? I think I
completely agree with Liam’s
frustration but I don’t agree with
fmstration but I don’t agree with
his
frustration but I don’t agree with
his solution. I think there are
several things here. Firstly,
severalthings here. Firstly, in
several things here. Firstly, in
defence
severalthings here. Firstly, in
defence of the tier system, which I
will do on the half of the
Government, when you decide that you
are not going to have complete
lockdown with everyone staying at
home and when you decide you are not
going to have the absolute opposite,
you have to draw the line somewhere,
and there will always be really
horrible peculiarities in the way
you draw that line because things
will not make sense at that point...
The areas are too big. That is my
first point. Second point, when you
draw that line and say to pubs, you
can’t make a living now properly,
can’t make a living now property,
you have to
can’t make a living now properly,
you have to provide the support, and
the support they are getting now is
a third of
the support they are getting new is
a third of what it was, and in the
areas where they have been on
lockdown for months they are getting
the same, the additional grant, to
make separate grants, and you get
the same if you are in the Isle of
the same if you are in the Isla of
Wight as if you
the same if you are in the Isle of
Wight as if you are in Manchester
where you have been lockdown for
months and that is simply not fair.
In April, there is a new tax regime,
you have to start spending, paying
your business rates again, you will
have to start paying back all this
debt. There is a cut—off route ——
debt. There is a cut-off route --
that the
debt. There is a cut—off route ——
that the Government has to address.
And we have to do the simply not
just relying on the vaccine but
doing all the other things, having
the test entries in place, and by
doing that we reduce the spread of
this without, you know, just waiting
for the vaccine, because that will
take... I would say once you have
the 3.2 million people over 80
the 3.2 million peopla over 80
safely
the 3.2 million people over 80
safely vaccinated should they want
to take the vaccination, then you
ran start
can start moving towards a more age
ran start moving towards a more age
stratified
can start moving towards a more age
stratified approach. We have a lot
of very smart people in this
of very smart peopla in this
country, and
of very smart people in this
country, and I agree with Education
Secretary at least on that. We have
to be more clever rather than just a
blunt instrument of regional
lockdowns. Let’s take another
question, because I want to fit in a
few more with the time we have left.
Hunt?
With EU trade negotiations nearing
completion, would the government
still opt to walk away if EU
negotiators refuse to concede
on fishing, a sector worth less
than 0.1% of total UK GDP?
Michelle? When we had our Brexit
referendum, the key theme really was
taking back control of our money,
our borders, laws and our waters,
which means fishing rights. I don’t
it is unreasonable that, as an
independent sovereign state, we want
to be able to have that control over
our own water is on a fishing rights
at all. We are not asking for
something that is unreasonable from
the EU or something they have not
given to other nations. So this is
an important thing, and those
negotiations are still going on.
There is still the hope that we will
get a deal in time before the end...
And I
And Ijust
get a deal in time before the end...
And I just ask,
And Ijust ask, then, because our
political editor Laura Kuenssberg is
political editor [aura Kuenssberg is
reporting
political editor Laura Kuenssberg is
reporting tonight that the
negotiations are going less well,
negotiations are going lass well,
and
negotiations are going less well,
and that the EU is throwing in a few
new added things to be discussed. As
you all know, Laura is not in the
you all know, [aura is not in the
negotiations
you all know, Laura is not in the
negotiations and neither am I, so I
can’t give a blow by blow... But I’m
just asking what is happening. We
will find out over the coming days
exactly what is happening. We have
been very clear throughout this that
been very dear throughout this that
whether
been very clear throughout this that
whether we get a deal or not we will
make a success of this, and I don’t
think it is helpful talking about
this all the time as a deal. We have
a deal, the withdrawal agreement,
which protects things like... But we
are talking about a trade deal. We
are always harking back to where we
wear a while ago with this no deal
wear a whila ago with this no deal
rhetoric,
wear a while ago with this no deal
rhetoric, really. Sarah Moore? I
rhetoric, really. Sarah Moore? Iwas
asked on this programme on the 30th
of january --
ofjanuary -- and
asked on this programme on the 30th
ofJanuary —— and Sarah? The day
ofjanuary -- and Sarah? The day
before we
ofJanuary —— and Sarah? The day
before we left this programme, and I
remember saying we have no idea yet
what the final deal will look like.
We still have no idea what the final
deal will look like ten months
later. It’s ridiculous. The fact the
Government have got to this point
where we are right at the cusp of
the cut—off point is very bad
management, and it’s a very poor
show. I think we know the deal is
going to be thinner than it was
promised to be. I think we were
promised all bells and whistles, and
promised all bells and whisﬂas, and
it’s going to be
promised all bells and whistles, and
it’s going to be thinner, and I
think there are some very
significant issues we need to worry
about. The Government have told us
the deal is there to be done. I am
prepared to take them at their word
and maybe the deal will be done, and
I hope it will, but I know that the
industry, the haulage industry, the
logistics industries, are very
worried about what will happen. But
I would say we need to get the deal,
the Government need to do what they
said they would do, support
businesses through Covid, as they
said they would, then we need to
look beyond, and actually what kind
of country are we going to build?
How are we going to build an economy
next year, that will take more than
Rishi Sunak in a fancy cashmere
sweater telling us he is going to
freeze public sector pay. Do you
know what I mean? We need a plan for
what is the strategy...
Are you saying you would have
preferred to negotiate is to have
given an early and not by the
given an earty and not by the
British
given an early and not by the
British interest? I would have
British interest? Iwould have
preferred
British interest? I would have
preferred the Prime Minister to be
correct when he said he would get
the deal done in
the deal done inJuly, which is what
the deal done in july, which is what
he promised.
the deal done inJuly, which is what
he promised. He didn’t. He was
confident the deal was off and ready
in December. We haven’t seen it, and
there are businesses... If you are
in manufacturing now, how can you
in manufacturing now, how ran you
encourage
in manufacturing now, how can you
encourage investment abroad when you
don’t even know whether you are
going to be under a tariff regime in
a few weeks? If you are a farmer,
how ran you
how can you plan for the future if
how ran you plan for the future if
you don’t know
how can you plan for the future if
you don’t know what the terrorist
regime is going to be? A look at our
financial services already decided
to go elsewhere, because this
uncertainty has meant people had no
idea what is ahead, and that is bad
management. It is an active
negotiation. Peter. I
negotiation. Peter. Ithink
management. It is an active
negotiation. Peter. I think it is
desperately important that there is
attention paid to scientific
collaboration in this negotiation
over Brexit. We know that the
collaborations we have had over the
past few decades within the EU have
been absolutely vital in driving
science, and that is the way science
is going. It is very collaborative
and international top we have
benefited hugely from the European
funding system where every thing we
get in, we get 8.6 million back, so
this is a very important point for
UK universities and science, but we
get a really good deal in terms of
being still able to continue that
collaboration. We have a withdrawal
agreement. What we are going after
agreement. what we are going after
is a free
agreement. What we are going after
is a free trade agreement so we
don’t trade on WTO terms and, if we
do, there will be tariffs that are
low on most sectors but quite high
on some others. Maybe the money we
get back from Brussels, not spending
£10 billion a year, can be used to
£10 billion a year, ran be used to
subsidise
£10 billion a year, can be used to
subsidise some of the sectors that
will suffer under higher tariffs if
there isn’t a free trade agreement.
I think there will be in the end,
because it makes sense, the EU has a
trade deficit with us of almost £100
billion. That is hundreds of
thousands of
thousands ofjobs in Germany and
France, so
France, sol
thousands ofjobs in Germany and
France, so I think the European
Union once a deal, but I share
Alex’s frustration because, on the
Alex’s fmstration because, on the
surface,
Alex’s frustration because, on the
surface, fishing is a very small
percentage of the Apollo me —— the
percentage of the Apollo me -- the
economy, and
percentage of the Apollo me —— the
economy, and even smaller percentage
of the French economy, at Macon is a
fight on his hands in the next
election, not
election, notjust from Marine Le
election, not just from Marine Le
Pen but
election, notjust from Marine Le
Pen but also the fishermen and
politicians representing them in
northern France. But look at what we
are considering and who is being
reasonable for I study these issues
closely, and it’s always the Brits
by our own media that are presented
as being unreasonable at the
Europeans presented as being
sanguine. You are part of that
media. I am a freelance journalist.
The Common Fisheries Policy is not
in the Treaty of Rome which founded
the EU. It was cobbled together
quickly as Britain was entering in
1973 and for the cost of a lunch
with George Pompidou Edward Heath at
the last minute set, yeah, you can
the last minute set, yeah, you ran
enter our fishing
the last minute set, yeah, you can
enter our fishing waters, so we know
we have a situation where two thirds
of fish caught in British waters are
by non—British boats. 90% of the cod
by non-British boats. 9096 of the cod
taught in the
by non—British boats. 90% of the cod
caught in the English Channel is cut
taught in the English Channel is cut
by French
caught in the English Channel is cut
by French boats. That can’t be
right. This is a kind of colonial
relationship, where some independent
countries have a hold over the
resources of another now sovereign
independent country of stop the
reason fishing is such a small
proportion of our economy is because
it’s been decimated, and that is in
poorest parts of the company. Over
SON: of
50% of the English fishing quota has
5096 of the English fishing quota has
been to
50% of the English fishing quota has
been to foreign countries. Because
our industry can’t get an economic
foothold because it has been so
marginalised. By the way, lots of my
friends in the Green Party for many
years were against the Common
Fisheries Policy because it has led
to overfishing. If we had a British
fishing policy, we could allow
stocks to replenish in our British
waters. why
waters. Why can’t we have the same
waters. why can’t we have the same
deal that
waters. Why can’t we have the same
deal that the Norwegians have?
That’s why they didn’t
That’s why they didn’tjoin the
That’s why they didn’t join the
European
That’s why they didn’tjoin the
European Economic Community in 1973
for they renegotiate every year fair
and square. Lets hear
and square. Lets hearfrom some
for they renegotiate every year fair
and square. Lets hear from some of
our audience.
ouraudience. Steph. I
and square. Lets hear from some of
ouraudience. Steph. Ijust think
our audience. Staph. Ijust think
this
our audience. Steph. Ijust think
this often
ouraudience. Steph. Ijust think
this often ready deal we were
promised as another example of an
election promise that hasn’t been
met, and I
met, and Ijust wanted to ask, when
our our elected politicians and
leaders don’t actually start taking
more accountability for a number of
promises that have been broken over
the years? The oven ready deal was
in reference to the withdrawal
agreement. Matthew. Yes, if we take
back our waters, how are we going to
police them. Michelle, do you have a
view on that? This is about taking
back control not
back control notjust of our waters,
back control not just of our waters,
as we said
back control notjust of our waters,
as we said in the referendum, but
also our laws, our borders, and our
money. Matthew was asking about
policing it. This is about the
agreement we have. I don’t think we
are anticipating, if we enter
agreements with other countries,
suddenly they are not going to be
respected en masse. We did have cod
was before so it wouldn’t be
unprecedented. From hospitality
industry that needs Brexit, a deal
to come through as soon as possible,
solely for the foundation of
understanding where we are, it’s the
uncertainty of being able to move
forward. Time is running out
forward. Time is mnning out
quickly.
forward. Time is running out
quickly. Personally speaking, any
deal is going to be better than no
deal. The way that prices are going
to rise, the uncertainty of the
market, we are not a self—sufficient
market, we are not a self-sufficient
country. We
market, we are not a self—sufficient
country. We export... We only
produced 7096
produced 70% of the meat we need in
produced 7096 of the meat we need in
this country. We
produced 70% of the meat we need in
this country. We import at least
30%. Trade tariffs need to be sorted
3096. Trade tariffs need to be sorted
out the top
30%. Trade tariffs need to be sorted
out the top there is so much and
time is mnning
time is running out so rapidly as we
time is mnning out so rapidly as we
get to the end of
time is running out so rapidly as we
get to the end of Covid—19 we are
get to the end of Covid-19 we are
then at
get to the end of Covid—19 we are
then at the point of this Brexit,
and hospitality is set there with
and hospitality is sat there with
all
and hospitality is set there with
all those precious it is put under,
so much that hospitality can bring
so much that hospitality ran bring
to the
so much that hospitality can bring
to the forefront of regenerating, of
being part of the high street. We
talk about high street and retail
being in trouble, and a retail
experience generating movement,
rash,
cash, everything flowing, without
rash, everything ﬂowing, without
hospitality
cash, everything flowing, without
hospitality being a part of that why
then would you go to the high
street? How do we move things
forward? We need a solid foundation.
We need Brexit deals decided, we
need to be able to move forward, we
need to future proof how we can
need to future proof how we ran
build
need to future proof how we can
build forward through the
hospitality industry which is the
heating
beating heart and soul of
communities. That is what we are
forgetting when we talk about the
offers that we put in. It’s not
offers that we put in. It’s notjust
offers that we put in. It’s not just
about
offers that we put in. It’s notjust
about what we sell. We don’t
about what we sell. We don’tjust
about what we sell. We don’t just
sell food
about what we sell. We don’tjust
sell food and drink. We give the
fabric of society... It is
intertwined with meeting up, being a
part of it, and that needs the
foundation for us as a country, no
matter what business it is. We don’t
have much what —— time but I want to
have much what -- time but I want to
get one more
have much what —— time but I want to
get one more question him from them
26. Due to the Covid crisis,
in-person
in—person teaching across
universities has been dire. For some
students they only received two
hours a week. Equating to roughly
£289 per in—person session this
semester. How can you possibly
semester. How ran you possibly
justify
semester. How can you possibly
justify charging this amount,
especially to those in lower
socioeconomic brackets? I’m assuming
you are university student. What has
you are university student. what has
your
you are university student. What has
your experience been? I am, and
your experience been? lam, and it’s
your experience been? I am, and it’s
been
your experience been? lam, and it’s
been difficult this semester for the
last year, we were all dismissed
"TY
very earty,
last year, we were all dismissed
very early, earlier than expected,
very earty, eartier than expected,
and it has
very early, earlier than expected,
and it has come to everybody’s
and it has come to everybodrs
tension
and it has come to everybody’s
tension that is become prevalent
that Covid isn’t going anywhere, but
the management within many
universities has been rather
abysmal, in my opinion first up we
haven’t received the education we
have been promised. We haven’t
received the resources we have been
promised. Everything has been put on
hold. It’s rather worrying that I’m
still paying obscene fees for
minimal education. We only have five
minutes, so I’m going to go around
quickly. Liam. I have too school—age
quickly. Liam. I have too school-age
children, one
quickly. Liam. I have too school—age
children, one at university, but my
heart breaks for young people.
heart breaks for young peopla.
That’s why I
heart breaks for young people.
That’s why I wanted to see more age
stratified lockdown, and older
lacturers,
lecturers, older teachers who are
lacturers, older teachers who are
vulnerabla,
lecturers, older teachers who are
vulnerable, have pre—existing
conditions, of course they can
conditions, of course they ran
shield
conditions, of course they can
shield and be financially supported
when they are shielding, but I think
we have been far too quick to close
down schools and, for the most part,
universities. For me, it sticks in
the craw, and
the crew, and I’d like to see
universities refunding students at
this part of the fees they are
paying-
paying, particularly as we have
paying, particularty as we have
heard
paying, particularly as we have
heard students from lower
socioeconomic groups. Peter. Crib
it’s been incredibly tough year not
just for students but for staff. My
colleagues at imperial have been
working day and night to try and
make it possible to teach safely. I
must say, many universities have
succeeded well. There have been very
few in—class transmissions of the
few in-dass transmissions of the
virus, and
few in—class transmissions of the
virus, and there has been quite a
lot of transmission, but that’s
mostly due to students being very
social, which is after all why they
want to come to university. I think
it is patchy, but
it is patchy, butl
want to come to university. I think
it is patchy, but I do want to
acknowledge the huge efforts that
have been put in by many people at
universities and by hugely dedicated
people trying to deliver teaching
under very difficult circumstances.
The question is about the amount she
has been charged, and George
obviously feels she’s been
short—changed in terms of the
short-changed in terms of the
teaching she
short—changed in terms of the
teaching she is getting. It’s really
difficult and I sympathise. I know
some repayment has been made from
Manchester University, is it? You
will know better. Is for
accommodation, not teaching. I think
accommodation, not teaching. Ithink
other
accommodation, not teaching. I think
other universities are looking at
that and I think the government
should also look and see if there is
support they can give, the key is to
support they ran give, the key is to
be that
support they can give, the key is to
be that we cracked this thing and
make sure we come back to normal as
quickly as possible so everybody has
quickly as possibla so everybody has
to
quickly as possible so everybody has
to adhere to the rules, we have to
to adhere to the mles, we have to
improve Test
to adhere to the rules, we have to
improve Test and Trace. Korea do you
think students should be reimbursed
for their teaching? We have to look
at it. There will be lots of
different experiences depending on
what university and subject you do.
I think the governor should look at
it. I did 2 degrees and most people
told me were under 44 top bike and
that kind of teaching carry on? Been
a student is an incredibly expensive
thing these days and come up with a
lot of debt... It’s not
lot of debt... It’s notjust been a
lot of debt... It’s not just been a
student, that
lot of debt... It’s notjust been a
student, that whole point, if you
student, that whola point, if you
are spending
student, that whole point, if you
are spending money on something and
expecting 100% back for it, but
expecting 10096 back for it, but
you’re not
expecting 100% back for it, but
you’re not getting it, you are only
getting 5096,
getting 50%, surely you want 50%
getting 5096, surely you want 5096
back.
getting 50%, surely you want 50%
back. Students should be getting
their money back. This has been a
really difficult time for students,
and I totally empathise and try and
understand, having not been at
university during this time, I can
university during this time, I ran
only try and do
university during this time, I can
only try and do that, because it has
been really difficult, but we as a
government set maximum tuition fees,
sorry, the minimum, and
universities, if they want to charge
that maximum, we have been very
dear, they have
clear, they have to ensure the
dear, they have to ensure the
quality is
clear, they have to ensure the
quality is maintained and the
quantity is maintained and that that
tuition is also accessible. If you
don’t think you have been getting
that, I would urge you to make a
formal complaint to your university.
There is a process in place. So you
think the university should pay up
if students can prove they haven’t
if students ran prove they haven’t
had
if students can prove they haven’t
had much teaching? There are amazing
examples of blended learning
working, where universities have
gone above and beyond to produce
innovative, dynamic learning, and
it’s a success, it really is. Just
it’s a success, it really is. just
because
it’s a success, it really is. Just
because it’s online doesn’t have to
mean it’s inferior. Are there some
students that feel dissatisfied and
like they haven’t got that?
Absolutely, and there is a process
in place for them. They can claim
in place for them. They ran claim
from the
in place for them. They can claim
from the university and then go to
the OIA, the independent
adjudicator, and they potentially
ran get
can get partial or full refund based
ran get partial or full refund based
on that.
can get partial or full refund based
on that. Have any students succeeded
in that? In the past, with strikes,
a number of students went through
that process was there as a time—lag
that process was there as a time-lag
because
that process was there as a time—lag
because of the university played
first. Nobody is denying it hasn’t
been difficult, of course it has.
But a number of universities have
really invested in that blended
learning model by totally —— but I
learning model by totally -- but I
take on
learning model by totally —— but I
take on board the comments tonight
and I recognise the process that
should be followed. Does that answer
your question? Yeah, thank you.
That is a satisfied customer! That
is what Question Time is all about.
Lets have a vote in 15 years. Our
time is up. Tonight our questions
fame
came from above. Next week, our last
Question Time before Christmas,
Question Time before Christmas, the
audience will be coming from
Chelmsford so, if you live in or
around Chelmsford, get in touch on
the website and come and be part of
our audience.
ouraudience. I
the website and come and be part of
our audience. I want to remind you,
don’t forget, wherever you live
across the UK to apply to join our
audience for next year, what we are
falling cutie 50
calling cutie 50 as a shorthand, our
falling cutie 50 as a shorthand, our
pre-selected
calling cutie 50 as a shorthand, our
pre—selected audience of 50 people
pre-selected audience of 50 peopla
and
pre-selected audience of 50 people
and we
pre—selected audience of 50 people
and we will select from them every
week until we can have a live
audience back here again. You can
audience back here again. You ran
apply to be
audience back here again. You can
apply to be part of that, should you
wish, and we hope you will, on the
BBC Question Time website. Adrian
Chiles is coming up on BBC Radio 5
live with Question Time Extra Time
you ran see on
you can see on the screen had to get
you ran see on the screen had to get
in touch. For
you can see on the screen had to get
in touch. For now, thank you very
much to the panel for coming here
tonight. Peter, thank you for
joining us, and the audience from
Bath. Thank you for being part of
the programme. There is no Question
Time without you. Thank you for
watching. From Question Time,
bye-bye-
# Wonderland... #
Are you feeling Christmassy at all?
NEEDLE SCRATCHES
No.
What’s Christmassy about this?
Well, there’s that bloke.
Ho—ho—ho!
I’m in Santa’s Village.
This really is Christmas for me.
Does the power ever go to your head
about having
a good list and a bad list?
I would say
the sense of isolation is
slightly undermined by the fact
there are 50 people up here.
Escape with the Christmas
Misadventures of Romesh Ranganathan.
It’s Musicals Week
on Strictly Come Dancing.
# This is the greatest show
# Where it’s covered in all
the coloured lights
# Where the runaways
are running the night... #
Just beautiful.
The first time you ever doped,
how old were you?
Erm, ahem, wow,
straight into that, er...
It’s almost like a confessional.
They do need a chance to tell
someone what they went through.
We sowed the seeds of Isis
in 2003. We didn’t.
Morally, how does that sit with you?
It doesn’t fit. We must acquit.
There’s only one Rupert.
It’s kind of amazing
when you think about it.
It was a bit of a shock to me.
What happens next is up to
every one of us.
Stories that haven’t been told.
So it seems like we might be
on the verge of a post—Brexit trade
and security partnership deal,
whatever you want to call it,
with the EU, so we’ve reassembled
the Brexitcast gang.
Laura’s here, Chris is here,
Dr Adler is in Brussels,
and we’ve invited back a guest who’s
been on a few times.
It’s Tony Blair.
Hello.
Now, we are all obsessed
about The Crown, although obviously
as usual Chris Mason is four series
behind everyone else,
and everyone is obsessed
about Gillian Anderson playing
Margaret Thatcher.
Have you been watching?
Do you think Gillian Anderson got
Mrs T down to a tee?
I haven’t watched it.
0h, 0K.
SIGHS
Well, you are a busy
international man of
jetsetting mystery now, so...
Not really.
I watch lots of things.
Ijust haven’t watched that.
I know everyone’s fascinated by it
everywhere, but it’s not my...
Because you don’t need to watch
a drama of an audience
with the Queen, because you just
remember the 200 that
you actually had with her.
I actually never really
watch political...
Programmes that are sort
of political, because I know that
every time I’m watching them I am
always going to be thinking, "No,
that wouldn’t have happened," and it
would probably be that.
Have you never watched any
of the many dramatisations
of people playing you?
Absolutely not.
Not even Michael Sheen?!
Oh, come on!
I haven’t.
I’ve not seen The Queen,
for example.
No, because Ijust know
what would happen.
It’s an experience that,
because I was there...
Well, I think it’s time
to reduce the budget,